---
title: 'From West Texas'
date: 2021-07-03
---
I have committed a grave crime. A crime so grave that none of my predecessors have dared to commit for fear of generational retribution by the hegemon of their day. I am a brown American geoscientist. And, I should not exist. 

Brown geoscientists do and are allowed to exist. They just cannot be from the US. In my travels, I have found no violators to this rule in academic circles. In fact, in the 8 years I have spent in higher education, I have only met one brown American scientist. He hailed from a small southwest Texas town much like I did, and, though he did not ever know, his presence served as affirmation enough to help me convince myself to push the limits of my violation of the hegemon’s rule. 

I do not recall exactly when I started violating that rule. Ever since I was extremely young, I had been enamored with science. Albeit, mostly meteorology and paleontology. Back then, I would watch The Weather Channel, local news, and Jurassic Park with youthful devotion, and I even tried to mimic the speaking styles of Jim Cantore and Steve Brown despite my speech issues. I even somehow convinced my elementary principal to let me do weather reports for a time! Then, one day an agent of the hegemon, my 1st grade teacher, told me I could never be one because of my poor math skills. I was 5-6. I cried. But, I didn’t give up. 

Run-ins with the hegemon were numerous from then on. It always attempted to tell me what I couldn’t do and what I shouldn’t ever do. It always tried to assert that same label unto me: inferior. Much to the chagrin of the hegemon, there were always people who helped subvert its rule. These people had seen the hegemon destroy any who would violate its rule. Its self-preservation was based on it. The hegemon could regulate what they could teach me, but it could not regulate what they could give me. So, one sunny, cold Texas day in 2008, a teacher gave me books on geometry, trigonometry, and calculus. She circled similar concepts in each book that we had somewhat covered in class, and told me that they were mine forever. I didn’t need to give them back. I quickly stuffed the books into my stitched up, downtrodden backpack and waited for the day’s lesson to start. I was giddy about what the books had in store.

When I got home that day, I poured over each of the books filled with concepts that seemed way beyond what I could ever do. Two sentences from the calculus book stuck out the most to me. “Calculus is the study of change. Many disciplines such as physics, meteorology, and astronomy are heavily rooted on it.” At that point, I realized that if I had any hope of understanding these fields, then I needed to understand calculus. It was daunting. The notation made no sense to me. I struggled with some of the most basic things, but I had to push through. I redid exercises until I understood, and I brute forced my way through limits and differentiation. When I seemed happy with my progress, I decided to show my teacher, and she clapped in delight that I had found my way. She recommended me for a geoscience summer camp that would show me more about science and math than what they were ever allowed to do by the hegemon. 

The summer camp was weird. They were gonna take us over the course of 4 years to various places around the US to learn geology/geoscience. Did they not know the hegemon prohibited us from flying? And, how were we going to pay for these trips? Luckily, they had us covered. For one week each year, for 4 years, we got to be free from the hegemon’s rules. I could be a scientist I thought. Despite the niceness of the group who took me and gave me these wonderful times, I always felt something missing. What it was is hard to say. A protagonist’s call to action is best way of phrasing it. I lacked the motivation to be one, and I slightly felt ashamed of it. I was massively undecided on whether to be an engineer, a medical doctor, a chemist, or a geoscientist. Then, the first geophysicist I ever had the pleasure of meeting came into my life. 

And, I would never be the same. For years, I had been shown what science could do: the practical applications, but it wasn’t until meeting him that I realized what I could do for science. He was a force to be reckoned with, and I could imagine myself, for the first time, in 50-60 years what a life it would be. The questions to be asked. The puzzles to be solved. The thinking it would need to take to solve problems and issues. Everything clicked upon hearing his philosophy, and I realized every geoscientist I had met up until then had been operating under a similar philosophy of science. I immediately knew what course of action I wanted to take to achieve that goal: to be like him. I applied and enrolled at the University of Texas at Austin over the following year. But, the hegemon would lie in wait. It always does. 

In choosing to be a geoscientist, I had chosen the field where the hegemon was still the most powerful and haunting. Over the course of my time there, I would battle the hegemon numerous times. Even though I would win my battles, I began to be traumatized from seeing my friends get destroyed physically and mentally by it. Its rule after all was heavily enforced by the geosciences at the time. There were always people and places to find respite during my time there, and it made the trauma manageable. I was able to make it through with a little help from all of my friends, but the hegemon would get stronger still in the next level: grad school. 

Seeing like-minded and similar background colleagues fall to the hegemon severely demoralized me, being away from home, from Texas, didn’t help. I was out of my element. Whereas, there were people similar to me in Texas with which to find respite with, I struggled to find them there. As a result, the hegemon poisoned my mind, and I began to suffer from bouts of mental illness that would peak many times in what would become my masters institution. I suffered a calamitous defeat at the hands of the hegemon soon afterwards. I could no longer see myself as a meteorologist with the poisoning I suffered from the its influence, so I fell back to geophysics. To the roots that had initially led me to follow this career route in the first place. And, I headed west, to Oregon, for one last effort. But, poison works if anything slowly and picks up in time.

By the time I had started my PhD and around the time of the opening salvos of the pandemic, I fell to the hegemon one more time. I thought I was out for good. I thought I found I had no place in the hegemon’s world of geoscience. I cursed and cried for having chosen this field of all things. I entered one of the deepest depressive spells of my life. I thought my life as a scientist was at its end. That the hegemon would rule the Earth and finally bring me down like it had been trying to for my entire life. To keep me restrained in my podunk, rural, desert, southwest Texas town like all who came before and all who would come after. I was given one last chance later on in the summer to continue and hope for a different outcome or quit and do something else. I had no idea what I wanted to choose, and for the first time in my life, I was without direction. 

I did the only things I could do: run and read. It was in this way that I came across one of the great epiphanies of my life. The hegemon never had any power over me besides that which it had done so psychologically, and that if I disregarded its authority, I could win every time. It had no real power if I fought back. That by existing and violating its rule, then others would surely follow until its power evaporates once and for all. But to do so, I must exist. I chose to go back to my program, to continue on with my PhD to accomplish the goal of diminishing the hegemon in its last bastion. But while its power was fake, the trauma it inflicted was real, and I still needed time to recover.

I am now a PhD candidate in my program. One of the few brown geoscientists. One of the few brown American geoscientists. I exist and will continue to exist. And, I will win my war against the hegemon. 
